The ceasefire between America and Iran
is not built to last. From the moment it
was announced, multiple versions of the
same deal were already circulating
online, even between the Persian and
English texts. The United States says
the truce depends on Iran's compliance,
while Iran presents it as an agreement
built around its own terms. At the same
time, Israel rejects key elements
outright, especially regarding Lebanon,
where fighting continues. These are not
marginal disagreements, and they come on
top of pre-existing complications, such
as Iran's nuclear program, its missile
arsenal, and its drone capabilities. A
ceasefire requires a shared
understanding of terms, but here there
are none.
More importantly, the fundamentals of
the conflict remain unchanged. Trump
entered the war with specific objectives
in mind, while Iran pursued its own set
of aims. Neither side has achieved those
goals in any decisive way, and neither
side has given them up. And even as the
ceasefire takes hold, the military
posture tells a different story. More
than 70 transport planes landed in the
Middle East within 24 hours of the
truce, and over 50,000 troops are now
deployed across the periphery, with
numbers still rising. What's more, three
aircraft carriers, the USS Bush, the USS
Ford, and the USS Boxer, are all set to
converge in the region just as the
ceasefire is due to expire.
The pieces are falling into place. At
this moment, more than ever, watch what
they do, not what they say.
Meanwhile, Trump appears to be trying to
contain tensions with China amid reports
that Beijing may be supplying air
defense systems to Iran. Roughly three
dozen sources have picked up the story,
but it's difficult to pin down what's
actually happening. Each source presents
a different version of events.
This is exactly why I use Ground News,
today's sponsor. It's the best tool for
staying objective in my reporting.
Ground News lets me instantly see how
the coverage splits. While left-leaning
outlets call Trump's statement a threat,
most right-leaning sources frame it as a
warning. Same story seen through two
different realities. With Ground News,
however, I cut through that because they
pull in coverage from local and
international sources and put it in one
easy-to-read feed, letting me quickly
see every angle of the story and get to
the truth. And the color-coded layout
makes it easy to filter for
high-factuality sources, see political
bias, or filter for the geographic
origin of each source. On developing
stories like this, Ground News provides
clarity you don't find anywhere else.
Because I believe in Ground News so
much, we're offering you 40% off the
same Vantage Plan that I use for my
research. Just click the link in the
description or go to
ground.news/caspian.
It's one of the biggest discounts
they've ever offered.
The most immediate shift has been in the
Strait of Hormuz. Shipping has resumed,
but not under the same conditions as
before. Iran now controls the flow.
Tankers move through an IRGC-managed
corridor, often requiring prior
coordination and, in some cases,
payment. Iran is reportedly charging $1
for every barrel of oil that passes
through the Strait, paid in
cryptocurrency or yuan. With a typical
tanker carrying around 2 million
barrels, that comes out to roughly $2
million
per passage. In relative terms, that's a
modest cost, one most countries and
shipping firms can come to terms with.
So, this might actually stick because
the idea of going to war with Iran or
just paying a small fee is a no-brainer.
For Iran, however, the same arrangement
produces a very different outcome. At
2024 flow levels, between 15 and 20
fully loaded tankers passed through the
Strait each day. At roughly $2 million
per vessel, that translates into 30 to
40 million dollars daily or about 11 to
14 billion annually. That is a massive
windfall, one that would make the Strait
of Hormuz the most profitable toll
system on the planet, surpassing even
the Suez Canal.
To put things into perspective, that
level of income is comparable to the
annual military budgets of smaller
regional states. For Iran, it would
provide enough cash flow to finance
reconstruction, replenish military
stockpiles, and absorb the costs of the
war within a relatively short period of
time. But, the financial aspect is only
part of it, and not even the most
important part. Control over the Strait
of Hormuz is above all a source of
leverage. It allows Iran to influence
not just whether oil flows, but how it
flows. It can slow traffic, prioritize
certain shipments, or create uncertainty
without fully closing the waterway. In
practice, it would grant Iran an
extraordinary ability to shape global
energy prices, perhaps more so than any
other country. But, that wasn't the
original focus of the war, at least not
until Iran turned the Strait of Hormuz
into a pressure point. You see, America
entered the war with a specific set of
objectives: restrain Iran's nuclear
program, secure or remove its stockpile
of highly enriched uranium, reduce its
missile capabilities, weaken its proxy
networks, and seek regime change. But,
once Iran disrupted shipping in the
strait, restoring access to it quickly
became a central goal. Yet, none of the
predefined objectives have been achieved
in any decisive way.
Iran's nuclear program remains largely
intact. Its key facilities were built to
withstand air campaigns. The Fordow
enrichment plant, for instance, is
buried deep inside mountainous terrain,
in some cases up to 80 or 90 m
underground. These are not targets that
can be eliminated through conventional
strikes alone. At most, the war has set
the Iranians back, but not in a way they
can't recover from. Missiles and drones
present a similar problem. Iran has lost
equipment, but not the facilities and
supply chains that produce it. The
infrastructure is dispersed, often
concealed, and designed for continuity.
There is no centralized factory that can
be shut down, which means it can be
rebuilt. In previous conflicts, missile
inventories were replenished within
months, and there is little reason to
assume this time will be different.
Iran's proxy networks also remain in
place. They have taken losses, but they
are decentralized by design. Hezbollah
in Lebanon, Shia militias in Iraq and
other groups operate autonomously, each
with its own leadership, funding, and
supply lines. That decentralized
structure makes them resilient. Pressure
in one area does not eliminate the
others.
Meanwhile, the government in Tehran has
not shifted either. There has been no
collapse, no fragmentation, and no
visible move toward internal change. If
anything, the IRGC has expanded its
influence. It has consolidated political
power and sidelined any remaining
moderate faction. The result is that we
may yet see an even more uncompromising
Iran with fewer internal constraints
than before.
The only domain where US operations had
a clear impact was at sea. Iran's navy
took enormous losses with multiple large
surface vessels sunk, including
frigates, corvettes, and at least one
submarine.
Key naval bases along the southern coast
near Bandar Abbas and Chabahar were
struck early in the campaign, destroying
ships at port before they could
disperse. In sum, the majority of Iran's
larger warships have been taken out of
action.
That being said, Iran's naval strategy
does not depend on those ships. Its
maritime power is built around smaller,
mobile units, naval mines, and coastal
missile systems. These assets are harder
to track and better suited to the
geography of the Gulf, where shallow
waters and proximity to the Iranian
coast limit the range of larger fleets.
That environment favors area denial over
dominance, something Iran recognized
early on. So, the Iranians do not need
to control the sea in the conventional
sense. They only need to make movement
through it risky enough to shape
behavior.
This then helps explain the conflict's
outcome. The United States applied
sustained pressure through airstrikes in
an attempt to force Iran to concede or
change course. In just 40 days, the US
struck more than 13,000 targets across
the country, and even though rebuilding
the civilian infrastructure may take
decades, the Iranians never flinched.
They absorbed the pressure, retained
much of their deterrent capabilities,
and kept most of the government intact.
In fact, Iran emerged with a stronger
hand, with the Strait of Hormuz now
effectively under its control.
From the American perspective, however,
this creates a mismatch. The objectives
have not changed. Washington still aims
to restrain Iran's nuclear program,
secure or remove its stockpile of highly
enriched uranium, reduce its missile
cap- abilities, and weaken its proxy
networks. Goals that have defined the
campaign from the outset. However,
despite weeks of sustained operations,
Trump is no closer to achieving those
objectives than he was before the war.
The ceasefire that is now in effect does
not reconcile those positions. The war
may have ended, but the reasons for it
remain.
Diplomats from the US and Iran are set
to meet in Islamabad and work out the
terms of a lasting arrangement, but the
ceasefire may ultimately amount to
little more than a short pause between
phases of the conflict.
There are persistent gaps between the
main positions of Washington and Tehran,
especially around America's primary
demands. These are not side issues. They
go to the heart of Iran's deterrence and
sovereignty.
Additionally, both sides are entering
the talks claiming victory, which makes
compromise less likely. Instead of
concessions, they are starting with
maximalist demands, and Iran's proposal
reflects that exactly.
Tehran is calling for full sanctions
relief, formalized transit fees through
the Strait of Hormuz to finance
reconstruction, and a broader regional
ceasefire extending to fronts like
Lebanon. US officials have dismissed the
proposal as not good enough, while still
acknowledging it as a significant step.
But even where their positions overlap,
turning that into something workable is
difficult.
Full sanctions relief, for example, is
not something that can be delivered
quickly.
Parts of the US sanctions regime require
congressional approval, which creates
legal and bureaucratic barriers. So,
even if Trump were willing, he may not
be able to move at the pace the
negotiations would require.
The Strait of Hormuz is another sticking
point. The United States is unlikely to
accept any deal that effectively
legitimizes Iranian control over the
waterway without a clear enforcement
mechanism. The Strait is a critical
artery for global energy markets, and
any perception that it is being ceded to
a single actor runs against
long-standing norms of free transit.
Iran, however, sees its hold over the
Strait as a strategic asset, and
relinquishing it now would mean
surrendering one of the few clear
advantages it gained from the war. That
gap is difficult to close.
Ballistic missiles are another point of
friction. Iran has consistently treated
its missile program as non-negotiable.
After the destruction of parts of its
conventional forces, missiles and drones
have now become the backbone of its
deterrence. Accepting limits, whether on
range or capability, would undercut that
posture, and there is little indication
Tehran is willing to do so.
Meanwhile, the ceasefire itself has
built-in weaknesses. It's unclear
whether Lebanon is included, and that
ambiguity can be exploited. If Iran
accepts a deal that leaves Lebanon out,
it risks appearing to abandon Hezbollah.
If it refuses to move forward without
it, the talks could collapse. Either
way, it adds instability.
Israel's position adds another layer.
The Israelis are likely to oppose or
actively undermine any agreement that
preserves Iran's deterrent or regional
posture. From its perspective, such a
deal is not a solution, but a delay that
would eventually come back to haunt it,
which is why senior Israeli officials
have already denounced the ceasefire as
a political disaster.
That stance carries its own risks. It
raises the likelihood of unilateral
Israeli action, either to undermine the
negotiations or to continue striking
Iranian-linked assets outside the
ceasefire framework. If negotiations do
fail, the consequences could be
immediate.
Both sides still have plenty of targets,
and would likely escalate to increase
pressure. For the United States, that
could mean widening strikes beyond
military sites to include critical
infrastructure. Think of power plants,
desalination facilities, and other
systems that sustain daily life.
Ground operations would also become more
plausible, as the necessary forces would
already be in place.
That last point is already visible in
the background. America's military
buildup has not stopped. US tanker
aircraft continue to operate across the
region and even more assets are being
brought in from Europe. All the while,
additional marine units are still being
deployed to the Middle East. All of this
suggests Washington is preparing for the
possibility that diplomacy fails.
If that happens, if hostilities resume,
America may look for ways to strengthen
its position before returning to the
negotiating table for a second round.
One option would be to seize one of
Iran's offshore islands. Kharg Island is
of particular strategic value. It's the
linchpin of Iran's economy.
Capturing it would be the next best
thing to marching into Tehran and it
might be enough to shift the balance,
but it won't be easy. Any attempt to
hold the island would come at a heavy
cost and the fight could quickly turn
into a massacre. Both America and Iran
know precisely where this path goes. The
only question is whether they go with
it.
I've been your host Shirvan from
CaspianReport. If you enjoy these
videos, consider supporting the channel
on Patreon and click the bell icon so
the next one doesn't slip past you.
Thank you for your time and salaam.